doc: Adds TPF advanced_cluster migration guide & updates existing documentation and addresses remaining occurrences of PreviewProvider (#3584)
mongodb/terraform-provider-mongodbatlas: docs/guides/migrate-to-advanced-cluster-2.0.md

---
page_title: "Migration Guide: Advanced Cluster (v1.x → v2.0.0)"
---

> This guide helps you migrate from the legacy schema of `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` resource to the new schema introduced in v2.0.0 of the provider. The new implementation uses the recommended Terraform Plugin Framework, which, in addition to providing a better user experience and other features, adds support for the `moved` block between different resource types.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guide helps you migrate from the legacy schema of `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` resource to the new schema introduced in v2.0.0 of the provider.
```

should we just delete this? I know it's copied from the 1.29 upgrade guide, but probably here it is not needed

Author: i kept it because I thought it's still useful to motivate to move the new schema if they haven't already. This guide tells them about the breaking changes but also the benefits

> This guide helps you migrate from the legacy schema of `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` resource to the new schema introduced in v2.0.0 of the provider. The new implementation uses the recommended Terraform Plugin Framework, which, in addition to providing a better user experience and other features, adds support for the `moved` block between different resource types.

Reviewer 2: are we having a section (or mention) about differences between preview TPF and 2 TPF, like num_shards can't be used now (but could be used in TPF preview 2)

Author: will address that in  [CLOUDP-333683](https://jira.mongodb.org/browse/CLOUDP-333683), but I hadn't thought of a section like that but i think it makes sense

> ~> **IMPORTANT:** Preview of the new schema was already released in versions 1.29.0 and later which could be enabled by setting the environment variable `MONGODB_ATLAS_PREVIEW_PROVIDER_V2_ADVANCED_CLUSTER=true`. If you are already using the new schema preview, you would not be required to make any additional changes except that the mentioned environment variable is no longer required.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
~> **IMPORTANT:** Preview of the new schema was already released in versions 1.29.0 and later which could be enabled by setting the environment variable `MONGODB_ATLAS_PREVIEW_PROVIDER_V2_ADVANCED_CLUSTER=true`. If you are already using the new schema preview and not using deprecated attributes, you would not be required to make any additional changes except that the mentioned environment variable is no longer required.
```

> ## Configuration changes when upgrading from v1.x

Reviewer: why there's no mention of the deleted attributes?

Author: I planned to make updates related to that in [CLOUDP-333683](https://jira.mongodb.org/browse/CLOUDP-333683)

Author: added the same in the description

    region_name   = "US_EAST_1"
  }
}
```
goes to:
```terraform
replication_specs = [
  {
    region_configs = [
      {
        electable_specs = {
          instance_size = "M10"
          node_count    = 1
        }
        provider_name = "AWS"
        priority      = 7
        region_name   = "US_WEST_1"
      },
      {
        electable_specs = {
          instance_size = "M10"
          node_count    = 2
        }
        provider_name = "AWS"
        priority      = 6
        region_name   = "US_EAST_1"
      }
    ]
  }
]
```

2. Elements `connection_strings`, `timeouts`, `advanced_configuration`, `bi_connector_config`, `pinned_fcv`, `electable_specs`, `read_only_specs`, `analytics_specs`, `auto_scaling` and `analytics_auto_scaling` are now single attributes instead of blocks so they are an object. For example,
```terraform 
advanced_configuration {
  default_write_concern = "majority"
  javascript_enabled    = true
}  
```
goes to:
```terraform
advanced_configuration = {
  default_write_concern = "majority"
  javascript_enabled    = true
}  
```
If there are references to them, `[0]` or `.0` are dropped. For example,
```terraform
output "standard" {

>     value = mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster.cluster.connection_strings[0].standard

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  value = mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster.cluster.connection_strings[0].standard
```
nit

}
output "javascript_enabled" {
  value = mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster.cluster.advanced_configuration.0.javascript_enabled
}
```
goes to:
```terraform
output "standard" {

>     value = mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster.cluster.connection_strings.standard

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  value = mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster.cluster.connection_strings.standard
```
nit

}
output "javascript_enabled" {
  value = mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster.cluster.advanced_configuration.javascript_enabled
}
```

3. Elements `tags` and `labels` are now `maps` instead of `blocks`. For example,
```terraform
tags {
  key   = "env"
  value = "dev"
}
tags {
  key   = "tag 2"
  value = "val"
}
tags {
  key   = var.tag_key
  value = "another_val"
}

```
goes to:
```terraform
tags = {
  env           = "dev"         # key strings without blanks can be enclosed in quotes but not required
  "tag 2"       = "val"         # enclose key strings with blanks in quotes
  (var.tag_key) = "another_val" # enclose key expressions in brackets so they can be evaluated
}
```

## How to migrate

> If you're currently utilizing `mongodbatlas_cluster`, see our [Migration Guide](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/mongodb/mongodbatlas/latest/docs/guides/cluster-to-advanced-cluster-migration-guide).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If you currently use `mongodbatlas_cluster`, see our [Migration Guide](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/mongodb/mongodbatlas/latest/docs/guides/cluster-to-advanced-cluster-migration-guide).
```

> If you're currently utilizing `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` from v1.x.x of our provider, we recommend to follow these steps in order:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If you currently use `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` from v1.x.x of our provider, we recommend that you do the following steps:
```

> ~> **IMPORTANT:** Before doing any migration, create a backup of your [Terraform state file](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/cli/commands/state). The state file will be updated to the new format and the old format will no longer be supported.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
~> **IMPORTANT:** Before you migrate, create a backup of your [Terraform state file](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/cli/commands/state). The state file will update to the new format and the old format will no longer be supported.
```

> 1. Upon upgrading to v2.0.0+ from v1.x.x, when you run `terraform plan`, you'll see syntax errors -- this is expected since the definition file hasn't been updated yet using the latest schema.

Reviewer: are we planning to update this section by mentioning the cli plugin?

Author: yes, that should be done separately once the plugin is ready, no?
cc @lantoli

2. At this point, you can apply definition changes [explained on this page](#configuration-changes) until there are no errors and no planned changes. **Important**: Don't apply until the plan is empty. If it shows other changes, you must update the `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` configuration until it matches the original configuration.

> 3. Run `terraform apply` to apply the changes. Although there are no plan changes shown to the user, the `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` state will be updated to support the new schema.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
1. After you upgrade to v2.0.0+ from v1.x.x, when you run `terraform plan`, syntax errors will return as expected since the definition file hasn't been updated yet using the latest schema.
2. At this point, you can apply definition changes [explained on this page](#configuration-changes) until there are no errors and no planned changes. **Important**: Don't apply until the plan is empty. If it shows other changes, you must update the `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` configuration until it matches the original configuration.
3. Run `terraform apply` to apply the changes. Although there are no plan changes shown to the user, the `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` state will be updated to support the new schema.
```
